by the civil rights section headed by
Clem McGowan and responsibilities
filtered down to the Civil Rights unit
headed by Edward McDonough Hugh
Richard long a headquarters case agent
was assigned to the investigation as the
case progressed information on
developments was passed up through the
chain of command to Assistant Director
DeLoach associate director Clyde Tolson
and ultimately to director Hoover major
developments were summarized and sent
along daily if not more frequently out
in the field
the Memphis office designated the quote
office of origin close quote
initiated its investigation shortly
after the assassination while day-to-day
direction of the case resided in
Washington Memphis had a pivotal role to
play in the administration and
coordination of the case it was sent
copies of most of the reports from 57
other domestic field offices it
initiated and coordinated leads and it
produced a prosecute of summary report
after James Earl Ray's arrest in June
1968 there were no specific guidelines
in 1968 for an FBI investigation of an
assassination but the King murder was
promptly classified as a quote special
investigation unquote and it was handled
in a way that was quite distinct from
that of the ordinary criminal case as
this was flawed not in pursuit of the
fugitive but in the search for others
who may have been involved in the
assassination for example there is
reason to question the adequacy of the
FBI response to substantial evidence of
contacts between Ray and his brothers
Jerry and John at various times between
his escape from prison and the
assassination
that evidence includes such items as one
the statements of several witnesses
pointing to meetings between Ray and a
brother two denials by Ray Jerry and
John of pre assassination contact with
James that are in conflict with
information established independently
three Missouri State Penitentiary
records indicating John visited James
the day before he escaped for
information that Jerry on two occasions
admitted knowledge of a conspiracy in
the assassination and five Ray's
statements to a salesman in a gun story
just six days before the assassination
that he wished to exchange the rifle on
advice from his brother coupled with
these indications of a possible family
based association that pointed towards a
criminal relationship were indications
that the mysterious Raoul might actually
have been one or both of the brothers
even so the FBI never made a concerted
effort to check out the possibility of a
ray family conspiracy in the
assassination instead it treated the
brothers and other relevant relatives
almost so solely as information sources
as to James whereabouts in fact the
bureau became so preoccupied with the
fugitive search that on May 13th mr.
Hoover recommended with the concurrence
of mr. Deloatch mr. Rosen and mr. Tolson
the placing of electronic surveillance
devices in the homes of John ray Carol
pepper a sister and John's place of
business the grapevine Tavern in st.
Louis this clearly illegal action was
never endorsed by the Department of
Justice but the request itself is
disturbing enough not only does it show
a lack of concern for constitutional
rights of the relatives it establishes
the bureau's lack of entrance and a
possible conspiracy
the brothers had the tapes taps picked
up evidence of such a conspiracy the
illegality of the surveillance would
almost surely have tainted the evidence
in any subsequent conspiracy trial
internal FBI memoranda moreover
indicated that mr. Hoover and his
assistants were well aware of the
problem but made the request in any
event I would ask at this time mr.
chairman little copy passed along to the
FBI's Memphis field office and
subsequently transmitted to FBI
headquarters in Washington on October
31st 1968 after a directive issued from
headquarters no further letters were
xeroxed MLK exhibit F 504 which I would
request that be entered in the record at
this point is a copy of this
headquarters directive without objection
who may be enter into the record the
second occurred shortly after ray pled
guilty in March 1969 Ray was interviewed
by the agents in charge of the Memphis
field office for the purpose of
obtaining information on an
assassination conspiracy Ray was not
accompanied by an attorney nor was he
informed of his Miranda rights that is
his right to have an attorney paid Orin
pointed present his right to terminate
the interview at will his right to
remain silent and the fact that the
government could use his statement by
attorneys for the Department of Justice
it seems reasonable to attribute this to
the state of relations between the
department and the FBI in 1968 that they
were poor and counterproductive is
demonstrated by mr. Hoover's criticism
of attorney general Clark's press policy
FBI complaints of intrusion by the
department into its investigative
territory and a general lack of respect
for the department's leadership by the
FBI
departmental attorneys receive digest of
investigative reports often in a
superficial form
in weeks late as the day-to-day
investigation was directed at FBI
headquarters without consultation with
the department this was the case even
knowing it had been common practice in
major conspiracy investigations for
example in the antitrust and organized
crime areas will the bureau and the
department to work together and to work
together successfully when major
investigative steps were taken in an
interview with Ray for example there was
no participation by departmental
attorney and not once during the
investigation was a grand jury
interrogation with its sophisticated
techniques such as immunity grants put
to use to prove or probe a possible
conspiracy the committee is aware that
the blame for any deficiencies in the
relationship of the FBI and the
Department of Justice must be shared
while we are addressing the performance
of the bureau in today's hearing that of
the department itself will be the
subject of attention tomorrow mr.
chairman the next witness
Carla DeLoach was one of two assistants
to the director Hoover between 1965 and
mr. Hoover's retirement in 1970 mr. de
lopes supervised the activities of four
separate divisions which together
constituted the bureaus and
investigative arm included among them
was the domestic intelligence which
managed both the security and the
COINTELPRO cases against dr. King and
general investigative which provided
supervision for the assassination
investigation mr. loach therefore is in
a unique position to comment on FBI
programs against dr. King and the
performance of the bureau in its
investigation of his death at this time
mr. chairman it would be appropriate to
call
carpenter loach
many calls mr. DeLoach but would you
please please stand raise your right
hand be sworn
Sami sweat testimony you'll get before
this committees the truth the whole
truth nothing but the truth so help you
back Thank You mayor may be seated the
counsel for the witness please identify
himself with a record
Edward B Morgan well Morgan are you
building Washington DC thank you sir
okay I recognize the staff counsel happy
to be seen can you hear me mr. deluca
very well thank you would you state your
full name for the record please
Park the deed allows you to give the
committee a brief rundown of your
employment history from the time you
entered the FBI until your retirement
from the FBI in 1970
yes mr. Bies when I graduated from
college in 1942 I entered the FBI and a
clerical capacity offices in Norfolk
Cleveland in the various capacities as a
special agent of the FBI
I left the FBI and in 1944 to go into
service the United States Navy during
World War two after being honorably
discharged from the Navy and 1946 I
returned to the FBI again as a special
agent in Cleveland Ohio after serving
there for some period of time I was
transferred to Washington headquarters
of the FBI 1947 in 1951 if my memory
serves me correct and it's been nine
years since I left the FBI quite a long
time but I think I became an inspector
in 1951 I became an assistant director
in 1959 I believe an assistant to the
director in 1965 and retired in July
1970 after 28 and a half years service
in the FBI okay if I could just cover a
couple of points in that chronology in
1959 you became an assistant director
which
vision really records division mr.
Beaton and in 1965 you became assistant
to the director of mr. Hoover would you
describe briefly your responsibilities
as assistant to the director of mr.
Hoover well as assistant director in
charge of the crime Records Division I
had supervision of one division when I
became assistant to the director in 1965
to have supervision under reporting to
mr. Clyde Tolson who in turn reported to
mr. Hoover a supervision of four
divisions I was a general investigator
division which handled general criminal
matters the special investigative
division which handled organized crime
and Special Investigations the crime
Records Division which I just left which
handled public relations matters and the
domestic intelligence division right now
the domestic intelligence division was
the division within the Bureau Division
five which was responsible for the
security case against mr. Hoover excuse
me mr. King is that correct the security
case involving mr. King but the general
criminal division handled the special
investigation involving dr. King's
assassination right and that would be
the general Investigative Division which
was division six in the FBI got a
correction so in 1968 at the time of dr.
King's assassination you were number
three man in the Bureau underneath mr.
Tolson and mr. Hoover and had direct
supervisory responsibility for the
activities in both the domestic
intelligence division and the general
Investigative Division as well as other
divisions correct now the facts aren't
exactly correct mr. Beaton we didn't
play the numbers game there was no
number three nine or no number four man
there were two assistants to the
director I was assistant to the director
in charge of criminal investigative
activities and crime records which
included public relations and mr. John P
Moore was assistant to the director in
charge of as liaison with the Department
of Justice your port mr. Deason and it
states that but frankly I have no such
recollection of any biometric lock
calling mr. who
whatsoever and terminating me as liaison
as a matter of fact let me make it very
clear to the committee and the user that
I was never established to the best of
my knowledge as liaison with the
Department of Justice there was no such
title in my opinion I took it upon
myself to keep the Attorney General
advised because I had a very close
personal friendship with him and close
relationship with him was there any
other headquarters official who was more
involved in briefing of mr. Clark during
the assassination investigation than
yourself no sir
okay I did not mean to imply that there
was an official designation of liaison
but that wasn't in fact your one of the
roles that you serve during the
assassination investigation correct but
I do not recall mr. Clark calling over
and indicating that my services should
be terminated as liaison to him it may
have happened but I certainly don't
recall it in other words if mr. Clark
were to testify to that effect it's your
opinion that it would his recollection
would be erroneous on that matter I have
no recollection of mr. Clark calling mr.
Hoover as a matter of fact mr. Hoover to
my the best of my life now he's never
told me that I was terminated or that I
should not see the Attorney General or
officials of the department again as a
matter of fact mr. Deason I quite
frequently conferred with the Department
of Justice
following the apprehension of James Earl
Ray only any cases let me ask you this
mr. dillos did you confer specifically
with mr. Clark not to my knowledge here
following the apprehension of mr. ray no
sir I would not have unless mr. Clark
called me and I did not take it upon
myself to contact mr. Clark I have seen
mr. Clark since then within recent
months and we had a very cordial brief
conversation that shook hands as there's
no to my knowledge Lee certainly not on
my part there's no feeling of hostility
towards mr. Corin if I understand your
testimony correctly you met with mr.
Clark on a daily if not on a weekly if
not daily basis prior to mr. Ray's
arrest you have no recollection of
meeting him
after mr. Ray's arrest is that correct
after the isolated Empson that I refer
to sir I have no recollection of being
with him it may have happened sir but I
don't recall Miranda
I don't recall this but as I say my
memory has been refreshed after
reviewing a report the down of the third
paragraph where it was said by in the
memorandum dictated by mr. long a John
Larry Ray has expressed a cooperative
attitude higher it is felt that he is
not giving us complete and accurate
information
Carol pepper refuses to submit the
interview and is not cooperative it is
felted subject meaning James Earl Ray
telephones or personally contacts any of
the relatives it will most likely be
Carol pepper our brother John Larry Ray
there obviously is a second reason to
mr. beaten up in the first paragraph
these installations could assist in the
early apprehension of the subject now we
were spending hundreds of thousands of
dollars of the taxpayers money we had
the FBI tied up to a great extent on
this particular case there was an
overall overriding another reason other
reason again on sheer speculation why
was we thought it was necessary and that
was expelled out in this sentence which
could possibly be instrumental in
reducing the stresses in tension placed
on our national security subsequent to
the death of dr. King the assassination
of dr. King caused considerable burning
called pillage he calls pillaging it
caused rioting throughout our country it
was a time of stress and strain and just
my own opinion at this late date that
the FBI was very anxious to cause an
early apprehension of the subject and a
solution of this case as early as
possible now as to the legality or
illegality mr. Deason that is a matter
entirely up to the Department of Justice
the FBI can recommend investigative
leads to the department but as a matter
of this nature as the committee well
knows at that particular time the FBI
was not placing any wiretaps or
microphones and to the best of my
knowledge unless they had the approval
of the Attorney General and the FBI
I felt that if the Attorney General did
approve this would be sufficient legal
status so there was no question in the
FBI's mind as to the legality or
illegality it was a matter of putting an
investigative lead up to the Attorney
General of the United States okay well
right now I if you're responding I'm
sorry that I cut it off it is doubtful
that the AG will approve what were you
thinking of at that time when you when
you were speculating about the
possibility of having this proposal
rejected by the Attorney General mr.
Clark's philosophy that he was against
wiretaps unless they were in under the
aspects of national security as
expressed in this memorandum by
especially agent long he felt this did
have a connotation of national security
and view of the rioting and pillaging
and burning that was going on in our
country however I felt that that was not
a strong enough case and the Attorney
General would probably would disprove as
later turned out to be the case now to
the best of your recollection mr.
DeLoach is it not a fact that five weeks
after the assassination the major
portions of the rioting and pillaging
had subsided in the country yes but some
was still going on mr. Deason to the
best of my knowledge and it could arise
at any time the situation was still
tense Washington has never seen such
things as went on during the middle and
late sixties brickbats thrown two-tone
through the windows of the Department of
Justice that Pentagon stormed bombs
going off in various hallowed
institutions there was a very bad
feeling in our country at that time I
just want to clarify the record the
situation that you're currently
describing was not going on in
Washington as of May 9th
was it mr. Deloatch bomb is going off as
what as of what date May 9th the date of
this memo behind going off fires
pillaging
I don't recall whether there was or not
as to be okay but throughout the country
it was considerable tensioners if I
could ask you to refer to Martin Luther
King exhibit F - 502 the next memorandum
in your pie
and if you'd like to familiarize
yourself with that I'll describe it for
the record it is a memorandum sent from
mr. JJ K turn about the national
security of the United States about the
instance I mentioned previously and also
a very fervent desire to apprehend the
man responsible for the assassination of
dr. King as a result they follow they
forward a than an investigative lead to
the Attorney General and the Attorney
General would make the decision as to
whether or not this should be conducted
all right mr. DeLoach do you recall any
consideration given to the taint
problems that this recommendation could
raise in a possible conspiracy case
against relatives of the REA family make
it clearer evidence intercepted by these
taps if they had been installed would
not have been admissible against any of
the family members of mr. Wray because
it was unconstitutional in addition that
evidence could not have been used as the
basis for any type of investigation
against the family did you consider the
possible jeopardy that you were posing
to a possible conspiracy case against
family members of mr. Wray when you
recommended this proposal question is
moot mr. Beecham because I as I've
testified previously I don't recall the
memoranda at all so consequently I don't
recall any taint that was considered
over ten years ago ten and a half years
ago it doesn't express to me a very
sincere desire on the part of the FBI to
look into all aspects of the case
including the possible conspiratorial
aspects of the case okay mr. mr. deloach
in June of 1968 final question on
electronic surveillance the title 3 was
passed was a congressional federal
statute excuse me which provided a basis
for legal court authorized electronic
surveillance in certain criminal
investigations do you recall any
additional consideration being given to
the use of legal electronic surveillance
in this case following the passage of
title 3 I have no such recollections
division
at one final area of questioning with
witnesses before this committee that
there is a conspiracy when I left the
FBI in 1970 over eight years ago I
believe that I still believe that I do
think that just as in the assassination
of President Lincoln who was
assassinated 114 hundred and fifteen
hundred and sixteen years ago that from
time to time people will write books
people will attempt to exploit the
situation people will attempt to make
money out of the situation people will
attempt to bleed the taxpayers by trying
to perpetuate their own names and
reputations out of these unfortunate
incidents but again I repeat to the best
of my knowledge there is no conspiracy
and I do agree with these statements but
at the same time I think that the
Committees of this nature do a very
valuable service to the people of United
States to the Congress by assisting in
running down the leads and by putting
out more or less the fires of a motion
that happened from time to time as a
result of such unfortunate incidents I
think that to the FBI and all instances
should continue to run down leads that
come up to prove whether or not there is
a conspiracy but as of this time and
based upon my knowledge of the case
admittedly many years have passed but
nevertheless I know of nothing which
would indicate a conspiracy here you had
a subject that was a loner an egotist a
bigot a man that had verbally in prison
threatened to kill dr. King or said he
was going to kill dr. King a man that
hated blacks a man that wanted to be
known a man that stalked dr. King and
the evidence is overwhelming that he did
assassinate dr. King we've had an
opportunity to review the staff report
concerning the conspiracy investigation
which was conducted by the Department of
Justice and FBI the report finds
evidence and indicates a failure of the
FBI and the Department of Justice
together to adequately explore explore
the possibility of family involvement in
the assassination investigation would
you care to comment on those findings in
your report makes that allegation mr.
Deason but on the other hand your report
is somewhat contradictory and that you
said there was an intense effort to
interview the family and to bring
pressure on the family not to bring
pressure but to to stick with that phase
of it to continue interviews and there
were frequent interviews with the family
as given the example of the fact that
the FBI at a late date wanted to put a
electronic surveillance if the Attorney
General the highest legal officer in the
United States had approved that was a
direct example of the FBI bringing
pressure or at least attempting to find
out if there was a conspiracy involving
a particular family Mr DeLoach isn't it
clear from your recent review of the
documents surrounding the electronic
surveillance request that the sole
purpose stated for implementing that
request was to attempt to ascertain
whether mr. Rey made contact with family
members in order to locate the subject
in other words that the use of the
electronic surveillance there was not in
order to ascertain possible evidence of
a conspiracy but only to attempt to
track down the fugitive in the case
while the memorandum may have not
reflected that mr. Beach would not feel
certain he was in the minds of the FBI
and certainly it was in my mind at the
time that any phase of the investigation
including the conspiracy that come about
as a result of that wiretap or
microphone surveillance would have been
beneficial to the FBI providing the
chief legal officer the United States
the Attorney General had given authority
and thought he had been legal don't you
think it would have made a stronger
authorization request to the Department
of Justice to include as one of the
reasons for it possible interception of
evidence of a conspiracy if in fact that
was in the minds of the FBI agents
involved as requests
I doubt a necessity of the Supervisory
and determining whether or not other
people were involved in this that might
lead to the apprehension augury the very
fact that he wanted to find out yet
the relatives were involved certainly
indicates a feeling that the FBI to run
down any conspiratorial elements mr. de
loja I don't have any further questions
for you myself thank you very much thank
you sir okay this time the chair use
himself such time as he may consume
after which the committee will operate
under the five-minute rule
mr. loach you aware I'm sure that the
committee has received testimony from
several former agents prior to your
testimony here this morning two of whom
were mr. Brennan and mr. Morrill I'm
sure you you also know based upon
testimony already received let me ask
you dr. chairman excuse me sir I have
not seen their testimony I have seen
newspaper accounts of referring as I I
didn't didn't mean to indicate that you
had seen a testimony I thought perhaps
you aware of the fact that they had
testified yes sir I'm sorry to interrupt
you right certainly I mean it's a stir
than a couple of general questions maybe
we can avoid some in-depth interrogation
on a couple of subjects would you agree
that between 1962 and April 4th of 1968
that's a bureau conducted a security
investigation of dr. King and the
Southern Christian Leadership Conference
to determine the extent of communist
influence being exerted upon them mr.
Kennedy the Attorney General of the
United States first requested that I'm
testifying strictly from knowledge
several months later
when it was discovered that there was a
possibility of dr. King being affiliated
with a high-ranking member of the
Communist Executive Board a Board of
Trustees or whatever it was mr. mr.
Hoover bought that to mr. Kennedy's
attention immediately and mr. Kennedy at
that time authorized the surveillance
that did initiate the surveillance on
dr. King and it was handled by the
domestic intelligence division as I say
I did not have supervision of the
domestic Intelligence Division so
consequently my memory is somewhat hazy
okay would you agree that between 1963
and 1968 that the bureau engaged in a
campaign to discredit and neutralize dr.
King as an effective civil rights leader
chairman if I may I'd like to answer
that question in this way dr. King made
an allegation that FBI agents were not
to be trusted in the handling of civil
rights cases in Albany Georgia that cast
grave doubts upon the integrity of FBI
agents and the handling of civil rights
cases in those particular cases the FBI
was damned if you do and damned if you
don't in certain states agents had
rattlesnakes put in the driver's seat of
their car so they would be bitten when
they sat down agents were spit upon
agents were refused service and
restaurants one agent wife heard a knock
at her door on one occasion and she went
to this door front door and here were
four men carrying a coffin and they
simply told her that her husband's body
was contained in that coffin dumped it
on the floor and left well I'm trying to
point out there were it was hard enough
to investigate the civil rights cases at
that
without allegations being made casting
aspersions against the integrity of FBI
agents now I can easily understand the
dr. King and an emotional moment might
have made the statement but it was not a
true statement the fact was that four
out of five agents in Albany Georgia at
that particular time were northern born
reared and educated but this touched off
a feud between mr. Hoover and dr. King
in my opinion it was a very unfortunate
feud
I had to regard not only the public
relations of the FBI but the
investigative aspects of the FBI and
handling civil rights cases we needed
all the sources we could get and this of
course alienated civil rights sources
for mr. Hoover to come out at a lady's
press conference which was the first one
he ever held and indicate that dr. King
was they know two of them was the most
notorious liar in the United States as I
say I was against him making that
statement and I think the feud was very
unfortunate I think the campaign was
very unfortunate that you allude to mr.
Chairman I sent mr. Hoover during that
press conference with 22 ladies three
different notes asking him to withdraw
that statement or to at least indicate
to the ladies it was off the record as
the Women's National Press group in the
India and Washington area
he refused to do so on a third occasion
I sent him a note he said you mind your
own business and the ladies could not
wait to get out of the room and report
this to the wire services and their own
papers but this touched off a feud
between mr. Hoover and dr. King
allegations flew back and forth mister
dr. King called mr. Hoover senile and
said he was bowing under the under the
weight of his own office mr. Hoover
again repeated his notorious liar
statement mr. Hoover repeated this in a
statement later on to a reporter and I
asked the reporter if he would withdraw
the statement from his article because
it was causing the FBI difficulty from a
public relations standpoint but it did
become more or less of a feud between
the two men I was responsible for trying
to contact dr. King dr. King would not
return my calls I did
eventually talk to the now ambassador to
the United Nations of representing
United States and we arranged the
jointly the meeting between mr. Hoover
and dr. King and it turned out to be a
very peaceful meeting to specifically
answer your question there was a feud
there was a campaign and which mr.
Hoover more or less carried on is
supervised and there was unfortunately
uh various incidents which occurred back
and forth between the two men mostly all
mr. Hoover's part to discredit dr. King
to specifically answer your question mr.
chairman so when we finally we strip
your answer of these surpluses to answer
you to my question of yes would yes sir
it would certainly yield to the
gentleman from district Colombia mr.
melodious testimony is that the feud
began or surfaced at the time that mr.
Hoover had a press conference in 1964 is
that your testimony that's what that's
when mr. Hoover answered dr. King and so
far as the Albany Georgia allegations
concerned that's my recollection mr.
Conroy were you aware that that mr.
Hoover exhibited hostility for dr. King
much earlier I'm not aware of that sure
you're not aware of in many ways I don't
recall it Thank You mr. chairman for
yielding and I look forward to my five
minutes mr. notes let me ask you this
the comments that were made by dr. King
with reference to the FBI and Albany had
occurred some two years prior to the
statement made by mr. Hoover at the
press conference when he called dr. King
a notorious light had it now
I don't recall these specific dates mr.
chairman though the press conferences in
64 wasn't
I don't recall sir le carr you don't
recall that the Albany situation
occurred in 1962 I don't recall effort
and the best of my opinion the best of
my knowledge the two incidents were
quite close together are you aware of
the fact that mr. Mertle a former FBI
agent testified before this committee
and with reference to the FBI and their
investigation of civil rights violations
and complaints testify before this
committee that the FBI was dragging
their feet mr. Chairman I have every
respect for you and every respect for
this committee but I wonder if any
member of this committee are in a member
of the staff can name one FBI case for
the FBI dragged his feet in the Civil
Rights field I don't recall I'm
referring to the testimony of a former
FBI agent yes before this committee
yesterday I don't mean to discredit mr.
Murtagh in any way whatsoever I have not
seen his testimony but let's consider
mr. Murtagh for a second mr. chairman
mr. Murtagh was never a supervisory
agent and to the best of my recollection
mr. Murtagh was an agent assigned to the
Atlanta Georgia office he was never
assigned FBI headquarters in Washington
DC
mr. Murtagh had no overall knowledge of
the FBI or of its responsibilities mr.
Murdock Murtagh had no overall
responsibility or knowledge of the
immense field of civil rights
investigations only those perhaps in his
narrow sphere of category in Atlanta
Georgia or the surrounding area to have
to be an expert witness and I'm not
alluding to the fact that I'm an expert
witness because there many things I
don't know that may have happened at
that time but to be an expert witness
and to make sweeping statements that he
made before this committee he should
have at least had some supervisory
responsibilities our knowledge of the
overall responsibility of the FBI which
he did not have he was only one agent
among some 8,500 agents that was
assigned to the field at that time I had
never heard of mr. Murray
until he start testifying for our
volunteering to testify before various
committees well wouldn't you agree that
this is not necessarily an area where
one must possess expertise if one is
testifying as a result of his having
been an employee stationed in that
particular branch of the FBI and
testifies before this committee as to
his own personal knowledge and
observations that doesn't require as
being an expert in that area doesn't the
chairman it would depend entirely upon
whether I didn't visit why that
individual Warner to testify what was
his reason for testifying or where they
had an axe to grind against the FBI had
he written a book previously that he
want publicity what was his reason for
testifying
well mr. Murtaugh is a former agent who
retired under honorable conditions is
presently a professor of constitutional
law at the University who twice three
times during his testimony for this
committee you questioned his knowledge
I'm not aware of the incident mr. Foote
do you question his knowledge I don't
know where I can cut tuned or not mr.
Conroy I'm not familiar at the end he
questioned his knowledge that that a
request was made of him to find an
informant to get copies of SCLC
stationery and copies of the of the
handwriting of Andrew Young so that it
might be used against him in his effort
to be elected to the Congress again mr.
Conroy I'm not aware of the the
instances you speak of I'm only aware of
mr. mertle's background or Simoniz as an
agent and the fact that he did not log
over all knowledge of the
responsibilities of the FBI you
questioned he had specific knowledge of
what was happening in that office often
knowledge that perhaps you are not aware
of I quit
certainly the things that happened I may
not be aware on the spot Roy but I do
question his the knowledge concerning
the sweeping allegations he's made
concerning were you aware the
spending was spending the time and money
of 15 agents full-time to serve a survey
of dr. King and SCLC I have no knowledge
of that Thank You mr. Lodz let me ask
you this would you agree that the campus
high-ranking members of Congress to
obtain information concerning dr. King
and mr. Hoover approving giving this
information to those high-ranking
members of Congress and I do recall it
mr. Hoover from time to time not only
furnished information to the Attorney
General but to the White House
concerning information concerning dr.
King well in terms of this COINTELPRO
operation you had a specific role did
you not no sir not a specific role less
I'd like to make the record clear in
that regards to chairman that this
program was initiated while I was on the
administrative side of the house I had
nothing to do with the initiation of
this program was initiated by a mr.
William C Sullivan who was the assistant
director in charge of the domestic
intelligence division and mr. Allen
Belmont who was the assistant to the
director at that particular time they
supervised and operated that program
under mr. Hoover long before I became
assistant to the director after I became
the assistant to the director and
inherited this program under mr. Colson
mr. Hoover why then I knew about it I've
were up until that time I was not prior
to all aspects of this particular
program well the program started August
25th of 1967 what were you doing now I
put on the bottom that I doubt this
would be of any purpose I did the
memorandum dated October 26 1966 that 12
years ago it's designated as D - 31 M LK
449 see that appears to be my memorandum
mr. chairman and where I talked with mr.
John Bugis who was either with with the
vice president the Ford Motor Company
discuss with him the bikes contained
therein you're not testifying from your
own knowledge I will testify to my own
knowledge mr. Chairman I don't know
whether frankly in my own opinion where
dr. King would be classified as a member
of the Communist Party or not and with
reference to your statement about
someone high in a party exerting
influence over him do you have any
knowledge of that I recall the best of
my recollection there was such a man
under chairman and you tell the
committee then how you know that this
man had influence over dr. King I was
told mr. chairman and again I'm
testifying from facts of ten eleven year
twelve years ago and even beyond that
mr. chairman that this man wrote
speeches for dr. King that this man gave
financial advise to dr. King that this
man gave thought made policy decisions
for dr. King and consequently having
been told that there certainly would
have been some association between this
individual and dr. King you familiar at
all with dr. King's intellectual and
educational attainments I have read some
of dr. King's sermons and its chairman
from the standpoint of my own knowledge
I know that he was a symbol of
leadership of the civil rights movement
I have not gone into depth as to dr.
King's intellectual education no sir
well
maybe it'll help you if I said to you
that dr. King graduated from Morehouse
College with honors graduate at the top
of his class and Crozer Theological
Seminary then acquired a doctorate of
philosophy from Boston University and
upon what tell grooms
what did they do to stop the
infiltration of the civil rights
movement by the communist party well I
think FBI communications both to the
Attorney General and to the White House
on occasion calls the Department of
Justice to brief civil rights leaders as
to the dangers involved and to the best
of my recollection and I'm not clear on
this mr. chairman I think that FBI
communications to the White House caused
White House officials on occasion to
brief civil rights leaders to the
dangers involved and in my opinion even
at this late date that certainly would
have assisted the civil rights leaders
and knowing who was trying to undermine
them to infiltrate them and it calls him
to be worried
I think mr. Hoover's meeting with dr.
King or mr. Hoover indicated that he
should be very careful of his
associations with certain people
assisted dr. King from then on and being
wary of such associations then then you
really feel that that a man who had
the education and intelligence of a dr.
King needed doc mr. Hoover or somebody
else to tell him about the dangers of
the Communist Party infiltrating the
civil rights movement America not
necessarily our isolated incident his
example mr. chairman but I do feel that
men with equal brilliance over the years
have been taken in by the Communist
Party and by communist subversion I do
feel there's an unfortunate instance in
our society where great men of stature
had been taken in have possibly even
come Soviet espionage agents and
therefore I say with some gratification
that the Communists in my opinion failed
miserably to take over the civil rights
movement or to make a dent in the civil
rights movement I suppose you were
familiar with the conditions existing in
this nation that brought about the civil
rights movement aren't you yes sir you
know that at that period of history that
all over the south that blacks and
whites that there is evidence of which I
think the FBI was wire that seems to cut
the other ways which was seen the show
that he was not such an intense racist
and that his motive could have been
something else for example money for
example I believe the FBI was way out
that he had frequented a bar in Los
Angeles for some period of time and he
was there and that that bar was about a
1/3 black clientele and apparently he
visited they are ready to live without
expressing any racial feelings there is
evidence of a liaison with Miss Morales
in Mexico and possibly with Miss Marie
Martin and Los Angeles both of whom
appear to be women of color my question
is that these these incidents raise any
questions in the minds of the FBI
concerning racism as a motive
do you consider those are consistent
with racism as motive for them killing
mr. Pryor I don't remember those
specific incidents I do remember that
dr. King and while in prison according
to the investigation the best of my
recollection I'm sorry sir
when James Earl Ray was in prison to the
best of my knowledge he refused to to go
on work orders out on the prison farm
with blacks because of his dislike of
blacks and I think also that the best of
my knowledge that one occasion he told
an inmate in prison that he was going to
get dr. King he did have a general
reputation I believe in prison is being
bigoted anti-black as to specifically
answer your question and I would like to
do that sir if I had the knowledge I
don't recall the specific against that
you're mentioning such as frequenting
bars were black women are attempting to
engage in social activities with black
women I don't recall that sir in my
opinion he was
as definitely and he definitely hated
blacks he definitely was a loner
he was a bumbling yet at the same time a
very cleaning individual and I think
that because of being a bigot a racist
that he wanted to kill in his opinion
the the biggest man he could find in
order to make a name for himself as more
less attested by the fact that his
brother on one occasion
told whether it was FBI agents or not
I'm not sure but told us someone that IV
there was the FBI but again I'm not sure
but anyhow he said why all this fuss the
FBI making all this fuss trying to find
my brother all he did was to kill a
[ __ ] this in my opinion expresses the
anti black feeling of not only King but
that of his family well I have certainly
grant you there is ample evidence of
that sort of racist attitude and there
is evidence from his prison experiences
of the kind you mentioned to the
committee I believe that would be a
gross exaggeration insofar as possible
loss of interest is concerned I think
and I'm not with the FBI today and I
haven't been with them for almost nine
years but I think the FBI is still
interested in this case and will still
carry out any leads with respect to any
conspiracy not only in this case but in
the Kennedy case and the other case that
are receive a major nature to my
knowledge that case is still pending in
the FBI and will never be closed as long
as leaves are still being received but
the fact that a fugitive investigation
has been completed certainly would
curtailed usage of automobiles would
concur tale to some extent expenditures
but it does not mean that the FBI's lost
interest in the case it just means that
one phase of the case has been completed
and they're still working on other
phases of the case such as a conspiracy
angle but did you while you were still
in the bureau and still in a high
supervisory capacity issue any orders or
direct any order from mr. Hoover to
discontinue active participation in the
investigation of the
case following the apprehension no mr.
divine to answer your question I believe
that inspector Sullivan who the Major
Case inspector was called all for other
duties following the location of James
Earl Ray because the FBI felt that he
was the the man that had assassinated
dr. King and whether any other
curtailment of activities at that time
or not I don't recall but definitely the
case was still kept in a pending status
and definitely was the invent every lead
was still investigated very thoroughly
on another issue mr. deloach earlier I
think you testified that you never heard
of agent Murtagh prior to his appearance
before this committee and if I
accurately recall some of mr. Mertes
testimony he said that he had never met
mr. Hoover personally although he had
been in the bureau for an allusion it
became not only thinkable but we could
be thought to have been justified in in
in the nation and I wonder if you think
the FBI officials should have known that
their conduct in not only writing
articles like this and seeing her that
they were assimilated around the country
could have been I'm justified they
risked the life of dr. King what was the
last part of your question sir I'm sorry
do is it your opinion that the FBI
should have known that the kind of
activities to which we refer to these
these memos would unjustifiably risked
the life of dr. King
mr. pond Roy I think it'd be absolutely
ridiculous to assume that any of the
FBI's few attempts to describe dr. King
as ordered by mr. Hoover or Sullivan or
whoever participated in that caused an
atmosphere which would have resulted in
his assassination
I doubt it James Earl Ray had ever seen
any of the articles the one or two or
three articles which was put in the
newspapers which you've shown me here
today wasn't no one has shown me the
articles I don't know whether you've
appeared or not to tell you the truth
but I doubt it James Earl Ray or I doubt
that anyone but did that have to amount
anything has ever seen any of the
articles that if they did appear and had
been perpetrated by the FBI or knew
other discredit ation program to any
extent so consequently in my opinion the
fact that would overwhelmingly indicate
that the FBI did not be any atmosphere
which it caused harm to dr. King from a
physical standpoint or in my opinion any
other standpoint in your testimony mr.
Dillo she your alleged your alluded to
the fact that over the years the FBI had
compiled files on death threats directed
at dr. King is it is it fair to say that
at the time this period between 1963 and
1968 it would not have surprised you
that dr. King received death threats I
wouldn't have been surprised her I think
almost any individual in the public
limelight as dr. King was or any public
leader in our society today received
death threats well gain in in view of
those death threats and in retrospect
didn't the release of derogatory and
inflammatory information describing as a
traitor to the race in the country run
the risk of further poisoning the minds
of people who who might violently oppose
what dr. King stood for well against her
I was not on the investigative side of
the house at the time that language was
used and frankly I'm not aware of the
fact that such language was ever given
out from a public standpoint that
appeared to be mr. Sullivan's usage of
inflammatory language and whether we've
given out a night I'm not aware of that
fact mr. Conroy I just read to you the
and you have before you the Martin
Luther King exhibit 450 a correction
which has to do with the Houston article
where you not
I don't recall the article sir you don't
recall no sir you don't deny the FBI did
that do you I don't deny that mr. salt
mr. Brennan made this request and the
mature order to be done but then is that
your initial at the end of that memo yes
sir yes sir
the natural claw mail went through my
office
and on into mr. Tolson and then on into
mr. Hoover and in these particular cases
and the two were indicated that anything
pertaining this matter he should see
personally and so you didn't read this
like Barton he didn't read this I did
not read it you what is your signature
mean my signature I mean you initial my
initial means that this piece of mail
was received in my office and I read it
and I sent all in to mr. tolson's office
approximately 11 and a half years ago
and it doesn't mean approval it means
that I thought that mr. Hoover should
see this piece of mail that was my duty
to weed out mail but she should not see
and to approve and send it on my own or
else send it on anything M for final
approval
so finally mr. Chairman I appreciated
the extent to which you've allowed me to
to go on in your view the FBI was not
sensitive to the possible implications
of the derogatory information it
attempted to disseminate around the
country about dr. King as a traitor to
the race and to the nation for his own
life
no mr. Conroy has simply stated this
that the few attempts on the part of the
FBI to discredit dr. King as ordered by
mr. Hoover did not result in my opinion
an atmosphere which would have caused
physical harm to dr. King I carrying out
of this this campaign against dr. King
were you aware
or sensitive to the fact that this might
result in creating a climate within
which dr. King's life might well be
taken mr. Conroy I can't answer that
question because if I testified
previously the greater majority of these
memoranda took place prior to my
assuming any supervision of the
investigative divisions of the FBI yes I
went from not aware I am not aware of
any overall feeling of hysteria that
resulted as a result of the FBI's
actions just sheer speculation at this
late date I'm trying to testify to the
best of my ability but you you you
recall never having any having anyone in
either in a discussion or by memo
expressing some concern about the effect
that this campaign could have a pun dr.
King's life I have no such recollection
mr. Conroy Thank You mr. chairman
time a gentleman has expired
I'd like to have thee yeah I did a
marvelous job by the way tracking down
how much money had spent here and there
and remarkable investigative and I
compliment you for whatever part you had
in that by the way I think it was a
superb investigation on that level thank
you sir but the man did sustain himself
for a considerable period of time and
spent in several amount of money over
that time wouldn't it have loomed
shouldn't it have loomed in someone's
mind that that he had to get that money
from somewhere yes sir and it did in our
mind mr. pithy and I allude to the
possibilities of a bank robbery
investigation in all in Illinois and
there was an intense investigation by
the FBI to determine whether or not
James Earl Ray was involved in that bank
robbery and as a matter of fact to the
best of my recollection several
witnesses indicated that he was his
physical characteristics were very very
closely resembled one of the bank
robbers in that bank robbery is it your
opinion if I make complete this sir it
excuse me but to the best of my
knowledge there was some $44,500
involved in that bank robbery or even
more which would have given him Apple
funds to carry out his various travels
and his stalking off dr. King so is it
your judgment or your best guess that
that's the way he financed himself
that's my opinion that mr. Pythian in
the passports that he managed to
manufacture that did not raise any
problem for you was your recall sir in
Canada that particular time the laws
were since been changed but it was very
easy to get a passport so you don't
think that there had to be any
assistance on that score not as far as
passports are concerned no siree now you
made one request to surveil the family
members as I understand it on the
electronic surveillance I didn't quite
understand are you James Earl Ray kill
Martin Luther King and to the best of my
knowledge there are no facts to indicate
a conspiracy at this date and time Thank
You mr. Chung time Magellan has expired
chair recognize professor Blakey
director and then at least my effort or
where my concern in that commission was
on the organized crime task force sure
you recall that and that task force
recommended to the Commission and the
Commission ultimately adopted a
recommendation that said that the
investigation of sophisticated
conspiracies required and the integrated
use of a compulsory process in the
context of a grand jury
immunity techniques and electronic
surveillance I'm sure you recall those
recommendations I don't recall that
specifically mr. Blakey but it sounds
logical and you have testified here this
morning that you were satisfied with the
the contours and development of
King conspiracy case even though it did
not involve except perhaps one one small
suggestion the use of a grand jury
it never involved any effort to secure
testimony through immunity grants and
the only electronic surveillance was the
one that was suggested by the bureau but
not adopted by the department they could
not have obtained lawful evidence of a
conspiracy that's correct isn't it I've
given my opinion concerning again mr.
Blakey yes I'm sure but you may also
recall with me that in 1968 the Congress
passed the Crime Control Act of that
year that gave to the Department of
Justice fairly extensive immunity power
in 18 USC 25 14 and wiretapping
Authority in 18 USC 25 16 recall that if
I don't recall that no sir
would you accept my statement that in
fact did occur sir no sir okay Oh
suppose I was to tell you Mr DeLoach
that this committee since it began its
investigation of this matter utilizing
its executive session as if they were a
grand jury and utilizing its
congressional subpoena power as if it
were a grand jury subpoena power and
utilizing the immunity techniques that
were granted to to the Congress by the
Organized Crime Control Act of 1970 was
able to pick up on information that
reasonably could have been available to
the FBI in 1967 and through utilizing
those techniques recommended by the
president's Crime Commission in 67 but
not utilized by the FBI or the
Department adjusts together or
separately in 1968
was able to develop even ten years after
the fact the outlines of a conspiracy
case that may well have involved the
individuals who plotted the death of dr.
King and may well have involved actually
or bringing about the events in Memphis
if that were true would that lead you to
reconsider your judgement that what was
done in 1968 was satisfactory mr. Blakey
I've testified to the fact that to the
best of my knowledge I knew of no
conspiracy involving the assassination
of dr. King and to the best of my
knowledge also in my opinion definite
opinion James are already committed this
crime I am not aware of any additional
facts and you have not given me any
facts which would indicate that there is
a conspiracy mr. Loeb let me see if I
can't go back again suppose I suggested
to you that this committee had been able
to obtain that kind of evidence
utilizing all in however a fashion in a
congressional context those techniques
and all those I'm telling you in fact
that that evidence was developed well
would that lead you to reconsider your
judgment that you'll be satisfied with
what happened in 68 if you could show me
any facts which indicate a conspiracy
mr. Blakely I would certainly be glad to
reconsider but as your report indicates
you know if you have no evidence
indicating us from conspiracy so I'm not
aware like what's the facts loach I'm
not aware that that report indicates
that well you and you wanted you would
not rule out a conspiracy but you did
not indicate that you had facts
indicating a conspiracy for the best of
my knowledge after scanning your report
well I suspect the record will have to
speak for itself on that let me ask you
one other question that's related to
that in response to Chairman font Roy's
question you indicated that you did not
feel that the FBI is harassment and
propaganda campaign
directed that dr. King in fact so
created an atmosphere that the
assassination may have occurred as it
did in Memphis because no evidence had
been brought to your attention that
James Earl Ray or others that he may
have been associated with had ever been
reached by that propaganda suppose I
were to tell you that this committee has
in fact developed evidence that to some
degree at least that circle of people
who may have plotted the death of dr.
King and whose actions may have
contributed to James Earl Ray's conduct
in Memphis was in fact touched by the
FBI propaganda campaign I'm not aware of
that sir
well what mr. DeLoach the question is
suppose I told you that this community
has developed that evidence would that
lead you to reconsider the degree to
which the FBI may be responsible in some
degree for dr. King's death mr. Blakey
if you could show me indisputable facts
certainly I would reconsider but you
have shown me no such facts Thank You
Ashley throws my opinion I gave you my
opinions I have no further questions mr.
tuna mr. loads you have I'm sorry sir
loads you have indicated there were
certain documents that you'd like to
provide for the record and have included
in the record here today mr. chairman
had those now this bag shown me by this
committee I hope that I've been able to
be of some service to the committee into
the Congress that's all I have to say
sir
oh we certainly thank you very much with
loads for your parents here and for the
testimony you've given us thank you
there being nothing further at this time
you're excused sir thank you to the
chair at this time desires to make a
statement during the Kennedy
assassination hearings we turn to
evidence of Association and its
implications for conspiracy it occurred
to me that it might be appropriate to
discuss certain general principles that
seem applicable conspiracy is founded in
association I said then but more than
Association is required to establish
conspiracy I hoped at that time to
assist those who followed our hearings
or read our record to understand the
significance of what we were doing it
seems to me now they would be
appropriate to discuss for the record
the moral or legal standards the
committee might want to use in
evaluating the evidence on the ultimate
question as it has been put to us did
the FBI kill dr. Martin Luther King jr.
our earliest legal traditions those
rooted in English common law reflecting
that porins of the unjustifiable taking
of a human life Lord Koch a 17th century
textbook writer
formulated the classic definition of
murder when a man of sound memory and an
age of discretion unlawfully kills any
reasonable creature in being and under
the Kings peace with malice aforethought
either expressed or implied by the law
much of our legal learning on homicide
has been based on the concept of malice
aforethought the distinction between
murder and manslaughter turned on it
unjustified killing with malice
aforethought constituted murder
unjustified killing without malice
aforethought constituted manslaughter
behind all of this legal thought has
been our traditional judeo-christian
teachings
they are the bedrock on which our law
ultimately rests men act freely and they
are responsible for the results of their
actions but to destroy his moral
standing nevertheless heretofore our law
in the area of reckless or negligent
homicide has dealt with the conduct of
private citizens usually engaging in
ordinary occupations such as operating
an auto on the highway hunting with a
dangerous weapon providing medical
treatment and so on unusual cases have
of course been brought before the courts
that have involved operating in
nightclub where numerous patrons died in
a fire playing Russian roulette where
players are held responsible for the
death of another participating in a drag
race in which a death occurs analogies
between these usual or exceptional cases
and the evidence in these hearings are
strange and uncomfortable but also
compelling can it legitimately be said
that the FBI like the nightclub owner
consciously risk or should have foreseen
not a fire in a fire trap but that
others might be inflamed by it's
unlawful propaganda and do what the
bureau itself did not do fire a deadly
shot into dr. King can it legitimately
be said that the FBI like the player of
Russian Roulette consciously risk or
should have foreseen not that one
chamber of the revolver would be loaded
but that others might be encouraged by
its unlawful participation in another
kind of roulette in which the stakes
included dr. King's life
you